okay next Thursday we'll have the first
midterm exam okay I know it might come
as a surprise to some of you I hope not
all the information is now available on
bSpace
and also in my on my home page but there
are links between them anyway so where
you can find all the information on
either place and on Tuesday we'll have a
review lecture so you will be welcome
you are welcome to ask me questions on
Tuesday about the material the material
for the midterm exam is everything up to
this week okay everything we studied up
for this week so next week we'll have
review both in sections and in my in my
Tuesday lecture and then on Thursday
we'll have the exam right here now I
requested another room too so that we
have a little bit more space but
unfortunately it looks like no rooms are
available so we'll just have to use this
one utilize this as much as we can so
the in a way it makes things easier so
you don't have to we don't have to split
into two groups we'll all be here so the
exam will be just in the usual class
time will start sharp at 3:40 and will
finish at 5:00 right here
any questions yes no but all questions
like that are addressed or not on that
so I don't want to waste too much time
describing this because I believe that
all the information is available all
right and in the meantime I want to go
back to to the topic which we started
discussing last time thanks Alko topic
which we started cutting last time and
namely the differentials and already
last time I I talked about the
differentials in the case of functions
in one variable I would like to repeat
that now and then talk about
differentials of functions in two
variables
first one variable case so in case of
one variable we'll have a function f of
X and we'll have a graph of this
function graph of the function lives on
the plane where in addition to our
variable X we introduce one more
variable which is responsible for the
values of the function and usually
usually we denote this let the second
variable by Y but I would like to soar
to depart from this tradition today and
use a different different labeling for
the second coordinate because after this
I will talk about functions in two
variables where x and y will be two
independent arguments two independent
variables of the function and so I would
I don't want to have any confusion
between this variable here in case of
function one variable and the second
variable for functions in two variables
so that's why what I want to do is I
want to call it V then it will be more
close to what will happen for functions
in two variables because for functions
in two variables will have x and y two
independent variables and then V will be
responsible for the values right so X
and Z and as I said already many times
we don't have to use the X Y or X V you
in principle each time you can use any
letters you like it's just a tradition
to use x and y but white as well today
use X and Z because then then we'll be
able to appreciate the analogy between
the one-dimensional case in the
two-dimensional case more so the graph
of the function then will be given by
the equation V equals f of X this will
be the graph of this function of f of X
on the on the VX ZX plane
and so let's say let's say this is a
graph now we pick a point x0 there's a
particular value of of X it could be any
number any real number you like and what
we're interested in is we are interested
in the tangent line into some tangent
lines to this graph at this point that's
a tangent line right so what's so
special about the tangent line we've
talked about this many times before a
special thing about tangent line is well
there are two special things first of
all it's a line and a line is the
simplest curve right it's given by the
simplest possible equations amongst all
curves and just genetically it is the
simplest curve that you can draw that's
the first thing and the second thing is
that among all lines which pass through
this point which pass through this
particular point this red line
approximates the graph in the best
possible way in a small neighborhood of
this point in other words I'm not
claiming that this this line is a good
approximation to the graph everywhere
certainly it's not they diverge the
father away would get from this point
they diverge more the father or the
father will get away from this point but
just in a small neighborhood of this
point it is actually very good
approximation and in fact when I draw it
I it's kind of difficult to draw in such
a way that actually to insist that they
actually different because so they are
so close to each other that already
gives you the feeling that it indeed
that it's a very good approximation so
that's what tangent lines are good for
they give you a linear approximation to
your function in other words they they
capture the essential the essentials of
the behavior of this function in a small
neighborhood to this point to the
first-order as we say
which already contains a lot of
information so therefore it is useful to
write down the equation for this an
equation for this tangent line or more
precisely to think of this tangent line
as a graph of a linear function and so
what is what is this linear function
well we know that since the studies of
one variable calculus we know that the
slope of this tangent line is given by
the derivative of this function so the
tangent of this angle theta right here
is actually F prime of x0 right and so
the equation of the equation of the
tangent line are now just let's write it
in words or the tangent line at X 0 is a
following why is it so you actually I'm
writing Y because I'm used to writing Y
but like I said I want to use the V is
equal to F prime of X 0 times X minus X
zero plus V zero what is V 0 Z 0 is the
value of the function at this point and
so the 0 of course is just f of X 0 but
I prefer I could actually write here f
of X x0 also but I prefer to write as e
0 to kind of to make a notation a little
bit less heavy and I want to rewrite
this also as follows as e minus v-0 is
equal to F prime of X 0 times X minus F
0 I want to emphasize that this is a
particular number this is a particular
number this is a number
name is the slope and it appears in this
formula as the coefficient of
proportionality between the increment in
Z along this line and the increment in X
along this line so the increment
increment in Z and X are proportional
that's what this formal Express thats
what this form expresses proportional to
each other and the coefficient of
proportionality is nothing by the
derivative of F at this point okay so
it's important to realize that all of
this everything that I've done so far is
relative to a particular point x0 its
relative to X 0 if I choose a different
point let's say some x1 okay so this
will be the point will live here on the
I mean this the point with with such
x-coordinate will live here on the graph
and so the tangent line to this point
will be will be this blue line matching
to this point and surely this blue line
has nothing to do with this red line and
for good reason
tangent line is useful as much as we
want to understand the behavior of the
function in the neighborhood of that
point to which we draw the tangent line
so the tangent line becomes irrelevant
when we start talking about a point
which lies sufficiently far away you see
so when you talk about tangent lines you
have to specify the reference point the
initial point tangent line at what point
there is no such thing as tangent line
the tangent line to a graph there is a
tangent line there is tangent line for
each point for each point on the graph
that's the most that's the first
important thing but you have to remember
and then once you fix x0 your reference
point or more precisely your reference
point on the if you look at it on the
plane it's x0 and z0 where g 0 is the
value of the function at x0 once you
have that
then you have the equation for this
tangent line and sure enough it involves
the equation X 0 in a very sensual way
it involved it to place it first of all
the increment in X is counted relative
to X 0 and second of all the coefficient
of proportionality is the derivative of
F at this point F 0 so surely this
coefficient the slope will be different
for a different point and you can see
that the slope of the blue line is
different from the slope of the red line
so this formula really refers to the red
line this one ok so now the concept of
the differential the Consol differential
is just a concept of of this equation
that we have written of this equation
which expresses the proportionality of
of the increment in the value in the
argument of the function value of the
function under the linear approximation
so the notation so the important thing
to understand about differential is that
it's a particular it revolves around the
particular choice of notation for the
increment which I'm now going to explain
so all the difficulties in understanding
the differential in my view really boil
down to understanding the notation
that's why I'm going to be very careful
when I define this notation ok so we
introduce the following notation
I would like to denote X minus x0
I would like to denote X minus f0 s DX
this is just a notation and so I want to
emphasize by definition so I define this
to be just the difference between X and
0 now if I write it like this you
already see that this notation is
deficient because on the right
this expression depends on the choice of
x0 right when I write X minus x0 it
depends on choice of X 0 if X 0 is equal
to 0 this will be just X if X 0 is 1 it
will be X minus 1 if X 0 is 2 will be X
minus 2 and so on if it's you know PI it
will be X minus PI in other words on the
right hand side it's not I'm not talking
about a single function in X but it's a
function which you get it's a linear
functions very simple but it's a
function which you only get put you only
specify once you specify x0 but my
notation on the left does not carry x0
so that's that is the first major
problem in the implementation which we
use so let me cure that by actually
introducing it explicitly on the left
hand side so I will actually I will keep
track of x0 by putting it as an index as
an index in this notation so imprecise
that this is something that we are doing
for now and we will actually discard
later on I will I will put it in yellow
so let me just introduce notation DX
relative to X 0 I will just you know to
the following linear function X minus x0
I have the right to do this I can
introduce any notation I like right so
this is meditation I want introduce for
whatever reason likewise for the I want
to do the same VZ also relative to X 0
I would like to write as Z minus Z 0
maybe it's better to say the relative to
Z 0 but D 0 of course that is determined
this 1 1 since we are talking about
particular function f the U is
determined by X 0 so so in fact I could
write as the parameter is the X 0 Z 0
whatever I like but let's try to zero to
make it a little bit more consistent
it's actually determined by by by Z by X
here alright so and that's just going to
be Z minus Z 0 so so far it's not
totally tautological totally
pathological there is nothing in this
it's just a choice of notation but if I
do that then I can rewrite this formula
in the following way just this formula
on the left hand side I recognize what I
now called ez relative to Z 0 and on the
right hand side I recognise DX 0 to 2 X
0 so the same formula will look like
this DZ relative to Z 0 is equal to F
prime of x0 times DX so so I've done
nothing I just I've just used a certain
notation for just introduce some new
notation for for Z for the increment in
X and Z but now the formal starts
looking more familiar because you've
seen this for multi for in one variable
calculus but what's usually done is
usually we drop we drop the indices so
then it looks like this D is equal to f
prime of x0 DX and also we replace often
replace DZ by DF
so we get D F is equal to F prime C so
you recognize this formula right because
you can also use this to write F prime
is equal to DF DF over DX but now you
understand I hope you understand now
appreciate this formula more and
understand what what is what it means
usually in a you know in the textbook
they don't really explain what do you
mean by what is meant by DX what is
meant by DF or DZ which we use here
interchangeably because we are talking
about particular function f for which D
serves as the value the point is that DX
and V de are nothing but the increment
in the coordinate X and in the value G
along the tangent line along the tangent
line so the equation of the tangent line
which we know is given by this formula
just becomes the old formula that you
knew that GZ is equal to F prime DX or
if you wish the F equals F prime times
DX
you see the only problem in
understanding this formula is the fact
that usually we would put the clinical
abuse notation web use notation in a
sense that we drove some essential
information from the formula this would
be to me a much more consistent way of
expressing the fact that what we are
doing is just writing down the formula
the equation for the tangent line
it is important from the at least from
the outset to indicate the fact that GX
is not an absolute notion like X X or an
absolute notion it's a coordinate right
so X makes sense without a reference to
anything else its particular coordinate
DX is not an absolute notion it's a
relative notion DX is defined once you
choose the reference point once you
choose a reference point x0 then DX is
defined right so and then if the
reference point is 0 the X is just X if
the reference point is 1 its X minus 1
and so on and so forth right if
just X minus x0 likewise
VZ is not an absolute notion it is
really relative it is really relative to
the reference point once you choose the
reference point is just increment once
you realize that and you see that this
formula is nothing but the expression of
proportionality of the two increments
along the tangent line right which is
just the equation of the tangent line
all right do you see what I mean by this
these different questions about this I
wouldn't in a way you can say why am I
talking about all of this the poem
because we've learned nothing new what
we the only piece of essential
information is already available here
that's the equation of the tangent line
something we've known all along well all
along since the one variable calculus
right she's studying with one variable
culture but the reason I explain this is
because we are going to use this
notation DX and D F and DZ and I would
like to explain what it really means so
now I have explained this that this
explains where this notation what
differentiation means and I've explained
what the formal adult form note that
we've known DF equals f prime DX means
and it's just the equation of the
tangent line all right
now this expression f prime of x DX is
called a differential
f prime X zero yet and I would like to
to keep insisting on putting this X zero
just to make sure that we understand
that actually this is something which is
relative the relative notion is called
the differential all of the function f
at the point x equals F zero so let me
give you an example let's say f of X is
x squared minus minus 3x okay what is
the differential or the differential of
this of the function say 4x equals
differential 4x equals one
well we simply have to take the
derivative of this function what is the
derivative of this function it is just
2x minus 3 right just have to take the
derivative of this function at the point
x equals one so this one is what are you
indicate in other formats by x 0 this is
X 0 right so I substitute I simply
substitute this I have to substitute X 0
into this expression like here so I get
2 times 1 minus 3 so it's negative 1
right and then I multiply it by DX
relative to relative to the point X 0
which is in our case is 1 so in fact I
could also write it as minus 1 X 1 times
X minus 1
right so the differential dysfunction is
really this linear function negative 1
times X minus 1 which is the same as if
you want it's just 1 minus X but ok so
let's just leave it let's just leave it
like this
- maximums that's differential
dysfunction but usually what we're going
to do is we're going to abuse the
notation I mean from now on once we
understand what the meaning is we will
actually abuse annotation and we will
drop all the indices right so when we
drop all the indices will actually just
write minus bf and say this is a
differential of this function at the
point x equals 1 right we have to
realize that actually in this formula DX
is referring to this particular point
and if I change the point I will get a
different answer so change the point so
let's find the differential for x equals
2 so now it's 2 which is which is x0 so
I have to substitute this value into the
derivative so I substitute 2 here I get
2 times 2 minus 3 so I get 1 right so
now now F prime of 2 is equal to 1 or if
here it was negative 1 right and so I'm
going to get 1 times DX at X 0 equals 2
which is just well I can just erase one
of course just DX and then just in this
case we're going to just write DX
dropping the indices so suppose if this
yellow yellow chalk becomes invisible
and so the answer just becomes X but you
have to realize that this is a
differential at the point X equal 2 and
it's different from the differential at
the point X equal 1 which was a negative
DX so what I'm saying is what I drew
here on this diagram is that
well the differential is the function
whose graph is the tangent line the
tangent line depends on the choice of
the point
so therefore the differential also
depends on the choice of the point the
coefficient of the coefficient in front
of DX is going to be just the slope
which is derivative here negative one
here one right but also the X itself
actually has a different meaning here
the X is X minus one and here maybe I
should write here it's just X minus two
okay yes the differential is a function
of X which is equal to the F which is
equal to this this is a different
function of X which is equal to the
derivative of your original function f
at the point x0 times DX which is
understood as X minus x0 that's the
differential this particular linear
function it is precisely the function
whose graph is the tangent line
it's the equation of the tender it's a
poor as a function which gives the
tangent line when you you cannot say a
tension line is the function right you
can say tangent line is the graph of a
function you see what I mean I'm trying
to be precise I'm not it's not because I
want to be pedantic but there is too
much confusion as it is so I try to
separate different notions there's no
simple function there's a notion of a
graph of a function right so that's
right so Allah even it's a tangent line
is the function function sum is rule
which assigns to each number sometimes
you know we represent a function by its
graph this tangent line is the graph of
a function which functions the
differential exactly there is only one
function given which is f of X but there
is more than one tangent line there is a
tangent line for each point which I have
Illustrated I've drawn two of them I've
drawn the red one and the blue one right
yes
that's right that's right so you're
right so this is that's right so to be
pretty to be absolutely precise
here the would be DF 4x 0 equals 1 is
equal to then a minus DX at X 0 equals 1
D F at X 0 equals 2 is DX at X 0 equals
2 and if you want I can also do G F at X
0 equals 3 for example I just need to
calculate the derivative at the point 3
the derivative at the point 3 is 2 times
3 minus 3 which is 3 right so then the
answer will be 3 times DX at X 0 equals
3 and so on but of course now you can
kind of guess what this coefficient is
the coefficient is just 2x minus 3 so
instead of writing an infinite list of
answers for different values of x 0 I
just write I just tried the formula in
one stroke I just write one formula
which is responsible for all of this I
just write DF is equal to F prime of X
here yes
yeah well it's like you know when you're
certain things that allowed when you
want to become adult right I mean so
that's sort of it it's the same same
reason it does to simplify things but it
leads to incredible confusion in my
opinion so that's why I'm trying to
unravel the precise definition and then
explain how do we actually arrive at the
formula which you see in the book and I
agree and in some sense we should not be
allowed or more precisely we should be
mindful of this so whenever we see this
formula that's what we should see we
should see not a single formula but a
bunch of formulas which depend on the x0
on a choice of f0 the traits one formula
is not just one equation but it's a
collection of equations for each value
of x 0 for each value of 0 it is the
formula which says that DF relative to
that x0 is f Prime at that x0 times DX
at that x0 and this formula is nothing
but just saying G minus V 0 equals F
prime of x 0 times X minus x0 which is
the equation of the tangent line but we
write in one formula we write down all
equations for all tangent lines that's
what we do you see so that's the point
that's the point of incline I'm trying
to convey here okay and that's why I
give you examples so ah so maybe in this
case I would actually want to write more
precisely in this particular case I will
write F prime of X I have found it right
I have found that F prime of X is 2x
minus 3 so in fact I will write DF with
2x minus G of X 2x minus 3 times DX so
more precisely it is this formula which
is responsible for all of this because
if you have this formula you will get
this one if you substitute instead of X
we substitute value 1 right such the one
you get minus like I put it
that's equal to you will get one a
Texaco 3 you will get 3 and so on right
so this one formula will give you all of
them in other words I give you this
formula you should be able to substitute
any value X 0 and you will get the
equation of the tangent line at that X 0
does it make sense any other questions
ok so there is no nothing mysterious
about the differential the only
mysterious thing is that it is it should
actually be defined relative to a
particular point X 0 and what we have
done or people before us have done is
that at some point they decide to drop
this on annotation so the formal starts
looking like this and starts looking
very confusing because what does it mean
what is the fod DX becomes very very
confusing but if you remember that it
actually refers to a particular value m0
and once you remember that you know that
VF crit spawns 2 X minus x0 and GF
responds to Z minus Z 0 then the mystery
disappears there's no mystery it becomes
a extremely simple and mundane formula
just the formula for the tangent line
the equation for the tangent line that's
what it is okay so one more one more
piece of notation to sort of finish with
this we can also write Delta F so that
sort of to make things even more more
confusing there is also notation Delta F
ok and Delta F and again to be precise
we also have to say that it is relative
to some X 0 this by definition is f of X
plus x0 minus f of X so it is the
increment of the actual function it is
the increment of the actual function
where as DF DF is the increment of the
tangent line of the linear function
which approximates the our function you
see
so that's the difference between this
big Delta and small G so should not this
should not be confused not be confused
with EF relative to the point x0 which
is f prime of x0 and let me draw again
the picture let me magnify actually let
me not do a coordinate system but let me
magnify blow up the small neighborhood
of this point so here is my here's my
graph and here is my tangent line here's
my tangent line so here is x0 somewhere
and here will be X Z here will be I saw
I'm sorry I did I wrote something
correctly X minus X here sorry f of X
minus 6 so there is AG 0 and there is X
oh so now I'm trying to confuse you I'm
sorry yeah I was going to draw it on a
picture anyway so you would so look this
is the this is Delta F you see what I
mean this is AG 0 and this is X next is
very close to 0 ok I can measure the
value of the function itself which is
the yellow curve where I can measure the
difference between the values of the
function that's this right or I can Mel
I can measure the difference between the
values of the linear approximation the
linear function which corresponds to the
tangent line that's D F okay
still I mean this are different because
it doesn't quite go up to here they said
the divergent they start deviating from
each other but the punchline is that
they are almost equal the difference is
negligible the closer you get to this
point the closer X and x 0 are the
smaller the difference is going to
become right that's the punchline which
expresses the fact that the linear
approximation is useful in following
sense that that when you are very close
to the point your linear function whose
graph with the tangent line is almost as
good as the original function in case of
course your function is a nice one like
this so it's kind of a smooth function
and such functions from which this
linear approximation works are called
differentiable functions and so the
punch line of all of this discussion is
the following that there is a large
class of functions there's a large class
of functions F for which the difference
between Delta F and DF is negligible
it's very small
of two it's sort of it's much smaller
than the difference between X and X zero
so we can actually ignore it when X is
very close to X zero so an annotation is
different but the point is that the two
quantities for differentiable functions
are very close which is to say that the
linear function the function which gives
view the tangent line is a good
approximation to the original function
let me write it down so function f f of
f is called differentiable at X equal X
0 if Delta f at X 0 is equal to DF I'll
just 2x 0 plus
I promise you not to use epsilon but let
me use it anyway so to indicate that
it's something very small a bubble I
will not use the other side where
epsilon of X goes to zero as X goes to
zero so in other words this piece is
negligibly small you see because this
already goes to zero and this certainly
goes to zero when X goes to sorry when X
goes to X zero so this goes faster than
X minus X zero it goes to 0 faster than
X minus X zero so this is precisely what
I indicated by that little little little
death difference maybe let me point out
this this this little piece this is what
is epsilon of X and very little one
this tiny will be is something that goes
to 0 faster than X minus X here because
this already goes to zero and this goes
to here that goes as a square it roughly
goes at the square of X minus x0 so let
me we unravel this for you
[Applause]
in other words what we are saying that
function is differentiable this that's
the best expression Delta F and DF like
this so what is Delta f I explained the
Delta F is just f of X minus F of a zero
so let me just spell out what that
formula means let me call it we call
this star okay so for most star is just
saying the following this and now I want
to spell out what the F at x0 is and
here F at x0 is this right so it's F
prime X zero times X minus X 0 plus
epsilon of X now if you remember Taylor
series this gives you a good perspective
on this formula do you remember Taylor
series okay
whether you don't want tell series of
how about just the first two terms in
Taylor series
okay I'm not I'm not asking for more
than that Taylor series the idea was
that the difference that f of X the idea
was that f of X is equal to f of x0 plus
F prime of X 0 times X minus x0 plus 1/2
F double prime of 0 times X minus x0
squared plus and so on okay so I just
want to explain to you what what we are
doing now we are just looking at this at
the first two terms of the Taylor series
we are just focusing on the first two
terms of the Taylor series because this
one this one term is this ok now it's on
the left hand side but big deal we can
just rewrite it like this just take it
to the other side so you see this this
tooth this matches this this term match
this in the Taylor series we then have
all the higher derivatives and higher
powers of X minus x0 square second third
and so on and now I have taken all of
this stuff and just connoted it by this
one expression because see the main
point is that the powers of X minus x0
which show up in this term in the next
term are 2 3 4 and so on they are higher
than 1 so I can I consider cheap of the
first power X minus x0 and what will
remain for example here it's like second
power so this will have I just split X
minus x0 squared into this and one more
X minus X here so in other words this
thing goes to 0 by itself you see I mean
what I'm doing roughly is let's take
this term 1/2 F double prime of x0 times
X minus x0 squared what I'm doing is
just I'm writing it like this I mean
I've done nothing I just wrote the
square at the product and after this I
take this piece and call it epsilon so
then what I get is epsilon times X minus
X here the point is that this guy by
itself goes to 0 right it goes by itself
to here because this is finite this is
just some expression for example for the
function which I had which was the first
derivative was 2x minus 3 so the second
derivative would be 2 so this is just a
number which is 2 and it's 1/2 of 2 so
it's just 1 but then there is X minus x0
X minus x0 is something that goes to 0
as X approaches x0 but in addition I
have one more power X minus x0 because I
started out with the second power the
only term from which this will not be
the case is the first term in the Taylor
series the first term will have X minus
x0 to the power one and that's the one
which I retain
and then everything else I say
everything else is really negligibly
small compared to this term so that's
the idea that's the main point of our
calculation now before we try to write
it as an infinite series which involves
all powers so all derivatives of the
function it involves no derivative at
all the first derivative the second
derivative and so on what we are saying
now is that how about let's just keep
the constant term which is f of X 0 and
let's keep the first derivative term
right which is gives rise to the linear
term in X let's just keep this and
everything else we'll just put in a bag
and call it epsilon of X times X minus
x0 it's something very small times X
minus x0 so its negligibly small
compared to the first two terms the
special thing about the first two terms
is that they give you a linear function
which is the function whose graph is the
tangent line right so writing down this
formula means that you approximate your
original function f of X by a linear
function by a linear function this one
plus some really really small negligibly
small error term that's what we've done
ok questions yes
that's right so I'm talking about
functions in one variable right because
I'm of the opinion that before you do
complicate thing you should start first
it with simple thing and this is the
function case of one variable so I
wanted to explain everything in the
scruciating detail for functions in one
variable so now we'll have to talk about
functions in two variables right but the
point is that everything is going to
work in exactly the same way and I
believe that you first have to
understand what happens for one variable
and only then you'll be able to fully
understand what happens for function two
there so let me explain now functions in
two variable what happens for functions
in two variable
so watch what crime is I want to keep
this and I kind of want to keep
everything but all right let me erase
this so now we have a function two
variables x and y so we have f of X Y so
see aren't you glad I haven't used Y in
the previous you know calculations we
had X and Z now we have XY and Z right
so now we're going to have a graph of
this function but in space and that's
going to be a surface so let me try to
draw this I will do it in a slightly
different way than last time because I
think it will be a little bit more clear
but you tell me like this I want to draw
it like this
okay like this and now we have a point
and now I want to say that there are two
curves here which actually last time I
drew them with with red and blue it okay
don't worry about this so this is one
curve and that's another curve ah maybe
it look like this it's better like
because it's never satisfied you know
his drawings okay
I'm like this I think this is better you
see what I mean it's kind of a it's a
surface like this but it's concave last
time I drew it convex like this and now
it's concave I think it's a little a
little bit easier on the eyes so to
speak so this of course all lives in
three dimensional in three dimensional
space so there is a three dimensional
coordinate system as usual XYZ and this
corresponds to a particular point with
coordinates x0 and y0 see and now I want
to draw the analog of the tangent line
so this yellow thing this yellow thing
is the end look of this of the curve of
the graph of the function when I say
yellow thing I mean of course the whole
thing the surface right you see what I
mean okay so now before I had a tangent
line because it was a curve so for curve
it makes sense to talk about a tangent
line but for a surface like this it
makes more sense to talk about the
tangent plane it is two-dimensional so
in your linear approximation you should
use a linear surface but not a curved
a linear surface which is what we call a
plane so in fact I brought something to
illustrate this more so this should play
the role I try to find a basketball in
the math department but finding a
basketball in math department like well
you you complete the center it was
difficult so elected what I found so
this is the surface and I just want to
explain what the tangent plane is the
tangent plane is what is a plane let's
say if I if I pick a point if I pick a
point tangent plane is the plane which
that which is the closest plane to this
to the surface right so that's the first
point the first point I want to make and
the second point I want to make is that
tangent plane is going to change when
you change the point of contact if you
are interested in the tangent plane at
this particular point that's that's the
plane you have but if you want at this
one that's it's going to be this one
right so it's exactly the same thing as
we had for curves for tangent lines
tangent line depends on the choice of
the point okay now let me draw this
tangent line for you so you see to
indicate the to give sort of a more
shape and volume
well not volume but really the
two-dimensional aspect to this eye
perspective to this I I drew this tool I
do this two curves
what are these curves these are the
curves exactly same curves that I drew
last time this is the curve of
intersection
this is intersection with the plane with
the plane which which goes like this
which is parallel to put it to the yd
plane so it's really the plane where we
fix the x coordinate X equal x 0 you
will see that what I'm doing now is very
similar to what I did last time but
there are small differences for example
the graph I was using was caught with
convex in a different way also instead
of x0 y0 i use annotation a b and so on
but otherwise it's very similar to what
I did last on Tuesday right and and so
what I do is I can cut by a plane
vertical plane like this I can cut the
graph by this vertical plane vertical
plane which is parallel to Y Z and
that's the curve I get this is a curve
which lives on the on this on the Condor
on the graph on the surface on the bus
if you want so this is like five or part
of the bus and this lives on the bus and
then there is a perpendicular one which
I get by cutting it by a plane which is
parallel to the XZ plane that's this one
it's the only thing you say I confuse
them right I think it's what I was
trying to say is that this is this is
the sorry instance this is the curve you
get by cutting with a vertical one
parallel to Z Y and now this one is what
I get by cutting with a plane parallel
to the XZ so this one this curve is
intersection with the plane y equals y 0
so the graph is complicated graph to the
surface but on this graph for my point
x0 y0 i have i have drawn two curves
which in some sense i've written which
are perpendicular to each other these
are the curves of intersection of the
graph with two natural planes two
vertical planes one plane goes is
parallel to the blackboard that's this
one and the other one is parallel to
this one which kind of has an angle to
which really since I'm just giving it a
three-dimensional perspective but I'm
drawing it like this but in fact you
should think you should realize that
this it's a plane trip which should be
perpendicular to the blackboard this XZ
plane ok so I get two curves now curves
is something I can handle
because we now know everything but
curves we don't know everything about
tangent lines the curse so so this these
two curves have tangent lines for sure
just like this curve has tangent line at
our point right so let me draw two
tangent lines one will be the tangent
line to this curve of intersection and
the other one will be the tangent line
to this to this curve of intersection
and kind of trying to separate them a
little bit so that's why you see this as
though there is some distance between
them but there shouldn't be just make it
more visible
okay and now these two planes this two
line in fact they span a plane which
looks like this
see that's the plane which is kind of
slightly under underneath the graph
that's what I was illustrating when I
put a valve here right and that would be
the tangent plane so on this tangent
plane I would have two lines two lines
which are tangent to the intersection to
the to the curves on the graph which you
get by intersecting with the vertical
plane you see what I mean
this it is clear that's right it's a
tangent to that particular point it's
exactly if I take a different point it
will change right so because you know
imagine that there is a skier here so
that would be the tangent line but if I
take a different one it will be like
this it will get tilted in a different
way but not just like this but also you
know like this in all possible ways
right so everything I say it's relative
to a point relative to a particular
point Nate which I now call x0 y0 so
what I need to do is I need to write
down the equation for this tangent plane
just like I wrote down here the equation
for this tangent line right and then I
will say that this tangent line
approximates the graph in a very nice
way if the function is differentiable
and the equation for the tangent plane
will be called the differential of the
function at this point so it will
exactly parallel to what we did in one
variable case right so the immediate
task at hand is to write down the
equation for the tangent plane right
fortunately we know everything we need
to know about equations for planes right
and we are going to use it now because
we have previously studied the question
of writing down the equation of a plane
when we know two vectors which belong to
this plane right we know how to do it
first of all we know that to write down
the equation of the plane we need to
know a normal vector to the plane as
well as a point
I will surely would have a point that's
x0 y0
so we need a normal vector and we could
calculate a normal vector by taking
cross product of these two vectors which
go along which go along these two lines
right and what are those two vectors
those two vectors are the tangent
vectors to those curves which we can
easily find from the one variable
calculation right that's what we're
going to do now so let me explain what
what they actually would be more like
this way because it will be this this
way in this way it will be stored in the
direction of X&Y rather than in the
direction of not in the direction not in
the opposite direction so we want to
write down the equation all right
equation for the tangent plane to the
graph at the point x0 y0 and v0 where by
the way by the way the zero of course is
again F of x0 y do that's the value of
the function so what is the equation we
know that the equation is going to look
like this a times X minus x0 plus B y
minus y0 plus C times D minus D 0 equals
0 where ABC should be a normal vector
and how do I find a normal vector I take
these two vectors let's call them r1 and
r2 and I take the cross product C so now
you can actually have you can apply the
knowledge which we have acquired which
we have acquired earlier about equations
for flame now so now we can appreciate
what you know why it was important to
actually learn that well learn to do
these techniques about technique about
you know planes and lines and so on and
cross product so we have to figure out
what R 1 and R 2 are so let me talk
about our one but see R 1 is something
which I find by using a curve and this
curve is obtained I recall by
intersecting the graph with the plane y
equals y 0 in other words is what I used
to call which I called on Tuesday
freezing the second variable
intersecting with this plane means that
we freeze the second variable Y Y is
fixed its y 0 so effectively the problem
which is three-dimensional because we
have XY and Z becomes two-dimensional
because only the unfrozen variables
participate namely X and Z so that's why
now I'm going to draw that curve on the
X and V plane and it's going to look
like this where is my yellow
was my yellow joke oh yes I know here
this just for consistency I want to draw
it with yellow okay so it's going to
look like this because I'm looking at it
now from them from that angle so that X
goes this way and V goes this way so
that this curve this is the curve I'm
drawing it is decreasing that's why I do
it like this and this is a tangent
vector I'm interested in this is my r1
it's going to be a tangent vector so we
have to find a formula for this r1 right
but we know how to find tangent vectors
two primary curves right how to do this
well first of all what is this curve
this curve is Z equals f of X y 0 with a
frozen with a frozen frozen Y we have we
have just set y equals y 0 so this
function which by the way last time I
used to indicate it by writing it in red
so the function effectively becomes a
function in one variable only namely X
right let me call this let me call this
G of X because the function one variable
only so let's just call it G of X so
this is this is the graph of the
function V equals G of X all right let's
by the way the same notation I use on
Tuesday ok now I want to convert this
into parametric form because we've
learned how to do tangent vectors when
we have parametric form right so let's
do primary form but for graphs is very
easy chromatic form is x equals E and V
equals G of T
so I have this vector R of T which is T
G of T that the vector valued function
which corresponds to this parametric
curve and now I know that this vector R
which is a tangent vector R 1 is just
the derivative of this right it's just R
Prime at X 0 my point corresponds to T
equals x 0 is our point so this is a
formula we've learned before which now
comes very useful namely formula for the
tangent vector to a parametric curve I
have converted my curve into primary
curve in two variables with this
parameter ization right and now I can
use this and what do I find the first
derivative is 1 right this is the bribe
the prime means derivative respect to T
I'm just recalling the derivative with
respect to T variable so the riveted the
derivative of T is 1 and derivative of G
of T is G prime of T but T is X 0 so the
prime of 0 but now remember we agreed
that the derivative of G at X 0 is the
first partial derivative of F because
that's how we define the first partial
derivative right first partial
derivative was defined by taking that
function G which we get by freezing Y
and taking the derivative so what this
is is just 1 and F sub X at X 0 y 0 this
is the this is what I needed I have
found R 1
now this is not exactly true because R 1
is the vector in 3-space and now I have
done the calculation in 2-space where I
kind of ignored the Y variable
in fact the y-variable should be here
it's actually it's not like this but
it's going into the blackboard to comply
with the rule so what I found is this
vector into space but on the plane but
if I want the corresponding vector in
three space I have to also remember the
y coordinate and the y coordinate will
be zero so it will be in between these
two so the true vector r1 through vector
r1 in this formula is just is just one
zero and F sub X zero Y like this
because I found this guy's 1 and F X F
sub X but to have a true vector in three
space I also have to give it a third
coordinate which corresponds to Y this
is critical that which corresponds to X
and this is a coordinate which
corresponds to Z and I need one more
which corresponds to Y but it is zero
because everything is happening on the
plane which is perpendicular to the y
axis so that's our one now you need to
calculate r2 and of course you can guess
what the answer is
right the point is that now zero will
migrate here because now everything will
be happening on the different plane
which is the Y Z plane so the x
coordinates will have no role at all the
y coordinate will now play the role of X
so this would be 1 and this will be F
sub y it's exactly the same calculation
except I should draw it on the plane Y Z
and I should call it r2 and I should do
the same permutation in the same
calculation exactly the same so I'm not
doing it just to save time so that's the
answer I get so we are almost there
because now all we need to do is to find
normal vector to our plane which as we
already discussed is the cross product
so finally we get to use the cross
the cross product for something for
something really for something really
important right so this is this is our
application of the of a cross product so
r1 r2 is going to be as we as we
described and no doubt some of you may
have wondered why the hell are we doing
all this stuff right but now you can
appreciate you can appreciate that that
it is actually important I am just a for
shorthand I'm not writing
I'm voting x0y0 but I will restore them
later so what is this this is I times
this which is minus FX by and minus J
times FY FY times J and then K I just
get this matrix so it's one plus three
okay that's everybody agree with this we
have found a normal vector to our plane
that's the one
so normal vectors perpendicular to this
plane you want like this so say this is
our two this is our one and this is the
this is this is a perpendicular a normal
vector and that's it we're done because
now we can write down the formula for
the tangent plane you see this so the
formula for the tangent plane becomes
minus F sub X and you get minus F sub y
plus G max right and now I just want to
rewrite this in a nicer way Z minus Z 0
is equal to F sub X of X 0 y 0 times X
minus x0 plus F sub y 0 y 0 times y -1
here that's the equation of the tangent
plane and of course you should compare
it to the equation of the I have raised
it but I want to write it again in a one
dimensional case the equation was F
prime of 0 so it's totally now this
right G minus v-0 here was the
derivative times X minus x0
there was only one variable therefore
the only one derivative there was no
choice now there are two different
derivatives and both of them show up
this is a derivative with respect to X
or partial derivative with respect to x
times the increment in X and this is a
partial derivative with respect to Y
time's the increment in Y so this is the
linear function the right hand side is a
linear function whose graph gives gives
you that tangent plane and this function
is called the differential of F at this
point right so more precisely yes now
this is ABC this is what I got
then I wrote the equation of the tangent
plane over there by using this
coefficient the sequence issues I mean
if you want I put one here
we have two notations two different
choice to notation for vectors one is
with ijk and the other one with three
components when I have a vector I call
this ABC if this is a normal vector then
the equation of the plane is a times X
minus x0 plus B times X y minus y0 plus
C times V minus v-0 this is what I wrote
second form or from the bottom and this
you had now yeah
second form Oh from the bottom is the
equation for the plane which is
perpendicular to this vector okay any
other questions
all right so now I'm almost there and so
the right-hand side now is called the
differential it's called the
differential differential of F X Y at
the point x0 y0 it is a linear function
it is a linear function which
approximates well our function provided
that our function is differentiable in
fact f of XY is called differentiable at
x 0 y 0 compared to the one-dimensional
case if Delta F which is
which is right let's just read formula F
if f of X y minus f of X 0 y 0 is equal
to this linear function up to a small
correction term so FX of x 0 y 0 times X
minus X 0 plus F sub y and thank you
right here times y minus y 0 the
correction term I will now write a sum
of two terms before I had a correction
term which was something small times X
minus x0 but now I will write it
something small times X minus x0 plus
something small times y minus YC so if
you if you like if you like and to think
in terms of Taylor series you can
imagine that I'm writing a Taylor series
expansion for my function where I first
ride the constant term then I find write
the linear term which now has two
Salmons one coming from the first-degree
partial derivative ended up coming from
the second partial derivative and then I
will have quadratic terms and cubic
terms which would involve all the mixed
partial derivatives of higher-order but
then actually I kind of I don't want to
specify them other than to say that it
that they all together combined have
this shape something which is negligible
compared to these two terms something
that can be viewed as an error as a
negligible error term so epsilon 1 and
epsilon 2 have to go to 0 as XY
converges to X 0 right so that's the
condition okay so in fact I could stop
here but I want to explain the notation
again because I think all of this sounds
great
until you encounter initation and then
it becomes a little bit could become a
little bit confusing but now we can very
easily unravel the notation as well
because we now have a very good it
example of that in the one-dimensional
case so here is how the notation works
it just says in a one-dimensional case I
will have yet but to really really do
just it to the X I have to keep track of
the reference point which now is x0 y0
and so the X is X minus and 0 there is
also G Y which is y minus right here
and there is there is also DZ or DF DF
which is V minus 0 so this formula which
I put a checker frame can be written as
DF equals F sub X DX plus F sub y dy
more precisely you have to put
everywhere x0 y0 here X 0 y 0 here X 0 y
0 here 0 y 0 and here at 0 wiser if you
do that and you remember what this means
this will be identical it will become
identical to this nothing more nothing
less but you know in other words this
form will make sense for a given
reference point x0 y0 and it's nothing
but the equation for the tangent plane
but after this just to simplify the
formulas you kind of you draw up all the
indices you say okay let's just forget
about this first ago not forget let's
remember it but let's not write it on
the board or let's not write as an
important piece of paper so the formula
really becomes just DF equals f of X DX
plus FY dy
so if on a homework if from the homework
you're asked to write to compute the
differential of a function that's what
you're going to do we are going to take
the first the first partial derivative
times DX plus the second partial times
dy
so just nothing could be easier than
that you just take two partial
derivatives right but what time is it
now it's fine okay but now I have
explained to you what the meaning of
this formula is all right
so we'll we'll talk about it more during
the review on Tuesday